# Lesson 2: Primitive Types

## 8 primitive types

When developing a Java program, it is very important to keep in mind the essential and purpose of the following primitive types:

- int - also known as _integer_. _int_ type holds a wide range of non-fractional number values. 

Below is an example on how to declare an int data type:

	   int age = 49;

 - Byte - this data type is very similar to _int_, except it only takes up to 8 bits of memory.  This is why we call it a byte. Because the memory size is so small.

Here's how we can create _byte_:

	   `byte b = 100;`

 - Short - If we want to save memory and _byte_ is too small, we can use the type halfway between byte and _int: short.
	
	_short_ is declared like this:
 
	`short s = 20_020;`

- long - a _long_ is a data type that can hold a significantly larger set of possible values.

	long is declared like this:
 `long l = 1_234_567_890; `

- float - consists of basic fractional numbers in Java using the _float_ type. This is a single-precision decimal number. 

    `float f = 3.145f;` 
	`float f;` 

- double - It's stored in 64 bits of memory. This means it represents a much larger range of possible numbers than _float_.

	`double d = 3.13457599923384753929348D;` 
	`double d;` 

- boolean - It can contain only two values: _true_ or _false_. **It stores its value in a single bit.**

	`boolean b = true;` 
	`boolean b;`

- char - Also called a character, _char_ is a 16-bit integer representing a Unicode-encoded character. Its range is from 0 to 65,535. 

	`char c = 'a';` 
	`char c = 65;`
	`char c;`
